
This file contains the current hard-coded bindings for the impl.Client. It is
to be deleted when we move to Clasm bindings.


In vanishing view screen
------------------------

Note: cursor keys include PgUp / PgDown for the Z dimension (up is out, 
because we show up as up/left in the view currently) and Home / End for
the fourth dimension Å.

CURSOR. Move cursor.
CHARACTER. Append to cell's text.
BACKSPACE. Delete backward char.
DELETE.    Delete forward char.

NUMPAD-/ and NUMPAD-* Move cursor inside a vstream.


CTRL-M. Mark cell. Only one cell can be marked and the mark is in a Java
	variable: invisible, not persistent in the structure.

CTRL-CURSOR. If connected, disconnect; if not connected, connect to marked.
ALT-CURSOR. New cell.
CTRL-ALT-CURSOR. Clone marked cell.
CTRL-ALT-SHIFT-CURSOR. Include a space (reads space ID from stdin) and
		       connect to the homecell of that space, in the given
		       direction.
SHIFT-CURSOR Hop.

CTRL-U. Update included space whose inclusion cell is accursed.

CTRL-G. Go to cell. Reads cell ID from stdin.
	If empty, goes to marked cell.
CTRL-P. Print ID of current cell.

CTRL-E. Edit. Invoke the external editor on the vstream of the cell.
        The editor is specified as the "user.editor" property
	(default exists but is left unspecified).

ENTER. Execute the accursed clasm function or expression and print out the
       return value. (No parameter is passed, even if it's a function; if
       you need parameters, construct an expression which calls that function.
       Functions are distinguished by noting they have a poswards connection
       on ClasmDims.d_def. Expressions are constructed with an empty 
       stackframe, i.e. no cells in that expression are handled as variables.)
	
CTRL-D. Rotate to the next dimension setting.
	Note: there is a list of dimension settings on d.2 (from the Dims
	parameter of a window). This goes to the next setting. The standard
	settings are: d.1 and d.2 without d.clone; d.1 and d.2 with d.clone;
	clasm programming; and the "code organization setup." That last one
	contains three dimensions on which we can organize the clasm functions
	used by the client, in any way we like. Only thing is that the
	structure should start at the home cell, and all functions should be
	reachable through the three dimensions of this setup, at least
	initially.

CTRL-Q Quit & save

CTRL-F reFresh screens based on the list.

CTRL-R Duplicate a parameter tree, marked cell as the source root, accursed
       cell will be root of the new tree.

CTRL-ALT-P Print the screen

CTRL-Z Change the zoom of the center cell
CTRL-. Move one page forwards (in a multi-page image span at cursor)
CTRL-, Move one page backwards (in a multi-page image span at cursor)

CTRL-ALT-R Create a reference to an image (one or multiple pages)
	on the mediaserver. Prompts for the block name.
	The reference is put into the accursed cell.
CTRL-ALT-T Transclude the span contents of the marked cell
	to the accursed cell.

In vstream screen
-----------------

Most of the previous ones work, plus some of these will actually work also 
elsewhere.

Cursor keys:
Left and Right Move in the stream character by character
Up and Down    Move in the stream block by block
Page Up/Dowm   Follow links

Ctrl-A Go to beginning of stream

Ctrl-E Go to end of stream

Ctrl-S Split the stream into two on current cursor position

Ctrl-J Join the stream and the next stream;

Ctrl-N Create a new comment on current cursor position

Ctrl-L Create a comment link between current cursor 
       position and the previously set mark.
